---
layout: post
title: Bryton Cyclocomputers and The Cloud
---

# Bryton S510

I have a [Bryton S510](https://www.brytonsport.com.tw/en/products/rider-s510)
and been using for a couple of months. Decent cyclocomputer if all you need is a
heads-up display of your current statistics, a map (we'll get to that later),
and navigation. I guess this is positioned as a Garmin Edge 840 competitor and
it's got features of most other bike computers. There's plenty of reviews about
those functions.

I'm here to talk about some things reviews fail to mention:
* The ability to create maps straight out of OpenStreetMap data.
* Its reliance on ~~cloud~~ online services

Why? Because Bryton is experiencing a complete outage of their online services
as of this writing and **I cannot send a prepared route to the bike computer
even with a prepared route file on hand as a consequence.** The route needs to
be uploaded to Bryton Active through their app, which is completely unusable
right now because it is down, be downloaded back to the phone, _and then_ can be
sent to the cyclocomputer.

I have half a brick and I can't even keep both pieces. Unbelievable.

<!--more-->

# Maps

Use of OpenStreetMap data is billed as one selling point of the cyclocomputer.
Whether Bryton intended to imply as having always up-to-date data, not stuck
with paywalls, or other reasons, they failed to deliver.

If you were to create routes on their desktop webapp at
<https://active.brytonsport.com>, map data is at least _three years out of
date_. I can't even grab a screenshot right now because it's broken. Navigation
using their Android app are updated because it uses Mapbox for map tile
rendering and GraphHopper for routing.

How do I know their map data is badly out of date?

There is a footbridge crossing a river near my place. This bridge opened more or
less last year. This was not in their map. There are points of interest for
places which have gone defunct at least two years ago. Map files for Philippines
in their map download site lists 2018 as its last update. Attempts to generate a
new map using their [Bryton Update
Tool](https://www.brytonsport.com/eService/#/supportResult?tag=BrytonTool) gives
literally the same map tiles as their web interface.

# Online services

As stated earlier, Bryton Active is...inactive. Broken. Down. Offline.

Consequences? Plenty.

No ride uploads (but you can still pull the files with a computer). No route
planning. No prepared route upload to the bike computer.

Route planning and ride upload unavailability I can understand. The inability to
send prepared routes to the bike computer caught me completely by surprise. This
was functionality I expected to be fully offline. With their services down, I
can't send routes and there's no known way to upload routes with desktop
computers. It's completely stupid. I don't understand how that scenario was
allowed to happen.

# Conclusion

If maps and navigation are important to you, get something else. If all you need
is something that tracks your rides and displays data, get a cheaper unit. I was
willing to give this a chance and was very disappointed.

This is mostly a rant with a touch of review. Do as you see fit.
